



Remote ATtestation ProcedureS                                 A. Poulain
Internet-Draft                                                   A. Kaci
Intended status: Standards Track                               Secure-IC
Expires: 21 September 2026                                 20 March 2026


                   Attestation of Hardware Components
         draft-paka-rats-hardware-component-attestation-latest

Abstract

   TODO Abstract

About This Document

   This note is to be removed before publishing as an RFC.

   The latest revision of this draft can be found at
   https://antoinepoulain.github.io/hardware-component-attestation/
   draft-paka-rats-hardware-component-attestation.html.  Status
   information for this document may be found at
   https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-paka-rats-hardware-component-
   attestation/.

   Discussion of this document takes place on the Remote ATtestation
   ProcedureS Working Group mailing list (mailto:rats@ietf.org), which
   is archived at https://mailarchive.ietf.org/arch/browse/rats/.
   Subscribe at https://www.ietf.org/mailman/listinfo/rats/.

   Source for this draft and an issue tracker can be found at
   https://github.com/antoinepoulain/hardware-component-attestation.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on 21 September 2026.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2026 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents (https://trustee.ietf.org/
   license-info) in effect on the date of publication of this document.
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.  Code Components
   extracted from this document must include Revised BSD License text as
   described in Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and are
   provided without warranty as described in the Revised BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction
   2.  Terminology
     2.1.  Requirements Notation
   3.  Scope and Limitations
   4.  Use Cases
   5.  Attester Model
     5.1.  Abstract Representation
       5.1.1.  Coupled Measurement Circuitry
       5.1.2.  External Measurement Circuitry
     5.2.  Measurement Collection Flow
     5.3.  Practical Examples
   6.  Inclusion in Conceptual Messages
     6.1.  Endorsement and Reference Values
     6.2.  Evidence
   7.  Security Considerations
     7.1.  Root of Trust Components
     7.2.  Threat Model
       7.2.1.  Software Attacks
       7.2.2.  Physical Attacks
       7.2.3.  Supply Chain Attacks
   8.  IANA Considerations
   9.  References
     9.1.  Normative References
     9.2.  Informative References
   Appendix A.  Collected CDDL
   Acknowledgments
   Authors' Addresses

1.  Introduction

   Hardware components form the foundation upon which all computations
   rely.  Therefore, the correctness and integrity of software execution
   depend on the proper functioning of the underlying hardware, which
   can be considered a root of trust for computation.

   Modern systems increasingly adopt disaggregated architectures, such
   as chiplet-based designs and large-scale heterogeneous platforms.
   These systems integrate hardware components from multiple sources,
   introducing new attack surfaces.

   At the same time, zero trust principles encourage reducing reliance
   on static trust anchors in favor of evidence reflecting the actual
   runtime state of components.  However, current attestation mechanisms
   for hardware components primarily rely on manufacturer-issued
   endorsements, which capture properties established prior to
   deployment but provide limited visibility into runtime hardware
   behavior.

   This document considers a threat model in which hardware components
   may be affected not only by adversarial actions, but also by physical
   phenomena such as environmental variations, aging, and natural
   degradation.  These aspects are particularly important in systems
   with strong safety requirements.

   To address these limitations, this document defines a data model and
   provides guidelines for including hardware component measurements in
   attestation Evidence, as described in the RATS architecture
   [RFC9334].  By incorporating runtime hardware measurements,
   attestation can provide improved visibility into the integrity and
   reliability of systems.  This document also outlines a security model
   for such measurements and provides examples of existing technologies
   that can be leveraged to obtain them.  These examples are
   informational only and do not mandate specific implementations.
   Instead, this document remains agnostic to the underlying measurement
   mechanisms and focuses on defining abstract interfaces and a data
   model for obtaining and representing such measurements.

2.  Terminology

   The terminology defined in [RFC9334] is reused throughout this
   document.

2.1.  Requirements Notation

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and
   "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in
   BCP 14 [RFC2119] [RFC8174] when, and only when, they appear in all
   capitals, as shown here.

3.  Scope and Limitations

   TODO

4.  Use Cases

   The solution presented in this document aims at mitigating two
   threats on hardware.

   *  Defective hardware components

   Malfunction of hardware components may be caused by environment and/
   or aging.  Detection of such malfunctions is critical when relying on
   systems evolving in hazardous environments such as high pressure,
   extreme temperatures, contact with water or chemical substances or
   space radiations.

   *  Attacks on hardware components

   Gaining control of the hardware of a system is particularly
   interesting for an attacker as it allows to tamper with the correct
   functioning of the system at a priviledged level.  Such control can
   be obtained by abusing software mechanisms or by having physical
   access on the system (particularly relevant for embedded systems).

5.  Attester Model

   The RATS architecture presented in [RFC9334] introduces two types of
   environments in an Attester.  The Attesting Environment (AE) is in
   charge of collecting claims about a Target Environment (TE).  The
   Attesting Environment is then responsible for embedding those claims
   in an Evidence Conceptual Message.

   This document focuses on claims used to represent the state of a
   target hardware component.  Said claims can be related to physical
   properties (electromagnetic or thermal signature, timing values,
   power consumption, ...), results of integrated self-tests or
   collected traces.

5.1.  Abstract Representation

   Mechanisms for collecting measurements of hardware components may be
   highly dependent on the type of hardware component and on the desired
   type of measurement.  Therefore, this document proposes an abstract
   representation of such mechanisms.  Considering the measurement
   mechanism as black boxes with common interfaces, allows the content
   of this document to remain agnostic of the underlying mechanism and
   of the type of measurement collected.

   The goal of this section is to propose standard interfaces to trigger
   the computation of the measurement and to collect the computed
   measurement.  Also, this section presents mapping of Attesting
   Environments and Target Environments in different integration models
   for these measurement mechanisms.

5.1.1.  Coupled Measurement Circuitry

   As shown in Figure 1, a part of the Attesting Environment is located
   on the Target Component.

         +-------------+    Trigger    +-------------------------+
         |             |  Measurement  |    +--------------+     |
         |             +--------------->    |              |     |
         |  Attesting  |               |    |   Target HW  |     |
         | Environment |               |    |   Component  |     |
         |             |               |    +--------------+     |
         |             <---------------+  Measurement Circuitry  |
         +-------------+    Export     +-------------------------+
                          Measurement

     Figure 1: Abstract Representation of Coupled Measurement Circuitry

5.1.2.  External Measurement Circuitry

   Another Attester layout is to have

   Ex: Sensors added on top of hardware component


   composite attester, can be many attesting env (and many target envs
   of course) An AE may collect on multiple TE

   Of course, both coupled and external measurement circuitries can be
   found in the same system and possibly, they can be used to measure a
   single Target Envrionment.  TODO this implies that a TE can have
   multiple measurmeent fields (I think already supported in RATS)

5.2.  Measurement Collection Flow

   Measurements of hardware components must be included in the Evidence
   to be sent to a Verifier.  This implies that the Attesting
   Environment possesses a way to trigger and collect the

   Measurement computation is triggered by something (boot, external
   request, watchdog, ...)

   Boot

   Runtime

   Interactions models between the Attester system and external entities
   such as the Verifier are already presented in other documents (TODO
   specify which ones).

5.3.  Practical Examples

   This section is for informational purposes only.

   Mapping to BIST and Traces

6.  Inclusion in Conceptual Messages

   This section introduces standard claims to be included in RATS
   Conceptual Messages.

6.1.  Endorsement and Reference Values

   CDDL Possible formats (CoRIM with CoMID, other ?)

6.2.  Evidence

   CDDL

   bytes-b64u = text .b64u bytes
   bytes8 = bytes .size 8
   bytes8-b64u = text .b64u bytes8

                         Figure 2: Example of CDDL

   Possible formats (EAT, DICE X.509, custom ?)

7.  Security Considerations

   The security considerations of RATS architecture apply (Section 12 of
   [RFC9334]).  This section also mentions protection against physical
   attacks.  These attacks are particularly relevant for this draft as
   collecting claims about hardware components implies a risk of
   physical attacks.  Aging and action of environment on the system are
   also considered threats.

   The following subsections are mainly focused on security
   considerations regarding the Attester.

7.1.  Root of Trust Components

   Some components are essential for attestation, if these are tampered
   with, there is no way to build meaningful Evidence (storage of
   attestation key, signature component, etc...).  These are considered
   the Root of Trust (RoT) for attestation because their correct
   functioning cannot be proved through attestation.

   These are to be put in contrast with other components that are not
   critical for attestation (altough they can be critical for the
   security system itself !).

7.2.  Threat Model

7.2.1.  Software Attacks

   There exist software attacks that can have a direct impact on
   hardware components’ behavior.  These are ideally mitigated by good
   and secure development practices but in case they happen, these
   attacks can be detected by monitoring physical properties of the
   component (such as power consumption, thermal and electromagnetic
   signatures, timing).

   Ex: Software-induced Denial-of-Service (DoS).

   Ex: Manipulation of privileged power control interface.

7.2.2.  Physical Attacks

   Physical attacks target the hardware of the system.  They imply
   physical access to the system during its mission mode or while it is
   in the supply chain.

7.2.2.1.  Passive Attacks

   Passive physical attacks are used by attackers to leak information
   through analysis of system physical properties.  Passive attacks, by
   definition, do not modify behavior of the system and therefore cannot
   alter the correct functioning of the attestation flow.

   Ex: Side channel analysis of physical properties (EM emissions, power
   consumption, timing, temperature, probing ...)

   The danger with passive attacks resides in the extraction of
   sensitive assets and particularly attestation key used to sign
   Evidence, which can be used for impersonation and Evidence forgery.
   This is already tackled in Section 12.1.1 of [RFC9334].

7.2.2.2.  Active Attacks

   Active physical attacks are the main problem since they allow an
   attacker (or a “natural” physical event) to tamper with the integrity
   of assets and execution flows of the system.  These may therefore
   modify measurements in transit or at rest, inject arbitrary data in
   Evidence or bypass sensitive operations.

   Ex: Attacks on bus (Active man-in-the-middle (MITM), injection,
   probing) or anywhere measurements are in transit before being
   integrated in a structure that cannot be tampered or spoofed (signed
   Evidence).

   Ex: Glitching, fault injections to induce malicious behavior.  May
   tamper with the target hardware component itself or the measurement
   circuitry or the logic used to build Evidence.

   Ex: Memory tampering attacks to modify stored measurements.

   Some techniques to mitigate physical attacks are usage of a TPM or
   secure element for storage and correct execution of protected logic,
   bus protections, redundancy, sensors, active meshes, nose injection,
   etc... Note that some of these mitigations cannot directly prevent
   attacks but can be used for detection.

7.2.3.  Supply Chain Attacks

   Each stage of the supply chain introduces a new opportunity for an
   attacker to tamper with the produced system.

   Supply chains attacks may lead to the injection of Trojans.  Once a
   Trojan has been triggered, its activity will be reflected on the
   physical properties of the component (modified timing, different
   power consumption).  It is therefore possible, in some cases, to
   detect an active Trojan by comparing the physical properties of the
   component when the Trojan is active against the reference physical
   properties of the component.  Note that, if the measurement circuitry
   is part of the component itself, which means that it has been
   integrated by the foundry that introduced the Trojan, then it cannot
   be trusted.

8.  IANA Considerations

   This document has no IANA actions.  TODO: need IANA actions for
   claims defined in this document ?

9.  References

9.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC2119, March 1997,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc2119>.

   [RFC8174]  Leiba, B., "Ambiguity of Uppercase vs Lowercase in RFC
              2119 Key Words", BCP 14, RFC 8174, DOI 10.17487/RFC8174,
              May 2017, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8174>.

   [RFC9334]  Birkholz, H., Thaler, D., Richardson, M., Smith, N., and
              W. Pan, "Remote ATtestation procedureS (RATS)
              Architecture", RFC 9334, DOI 10.17487/RFC9334, January
              2023, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9334>.

   [RFC9711]  Lundblade, L., Mandyam, G., O'Donoghue, J., and C.
              Wallace, "The Entity Attestation Token (EAT)", RFC 9711,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC9711, April 2025,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9711>.

9.2.  Informative References

   [ISO5891]  International Standards Organization, "ISO/IEC TR
              5891:2024, Information security, cybersecurity and privacy
              protection — Hardware monitoring technology for hardware
              security assessment", April 2024,
              <https://www.iso.org/fr/standard/81806.html>.

Appendix A.  Collected CDDL

   This appendix contains all the CDDL definitions included in this
   document.

   bytes-b64u = text .b64u bytes
   bytes8 = bytes .size 8
   bytes8-b64u = text .b64u bytes8
   mc-cbor = bytes .cbor measured-component
   mc-json = text .json measured-component
   $measurements-body-cbor /= mc-cbor / mc-json
   $measurements-body-json /= mc-json / text .b64u mc-cbor

Acknowledgments

   TODO acknowledge.

Authors' Addresses

   Antoine Poulain
   Secure-IC
   Email: antoine.poulain@secure-ic.com


   Abdellah Kaci
   Secure-IC
   Email: abdellah.kaci@secure-ic.com
